docs/docs/ai-presets.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 3.6
id: "ai-presets"
title: "AI Presets"
---

![AI Presets Menu](./img/ai-presets.png#right)

Wave's AI widget can be configured to work with various AI providers and models through presets. Presets allow you to define multiple AI configurations and easily switch between them using the dropdown menu in the AI widget.

## How AI Presets Work

AI presets are defined in `~/.config/waveterm/presets/ai.json`. You can easily edit this file using:

```bash
wsh editconfig presets/ai.json
```

Each preset defines a complete set of configuration values for the AI widget. When you select a preset from the dropdown menu, those configuration values are applied to the widget. If no preset is selected, the widget uses the default values from `settings.json`.

Here's a basic example using Claude:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-sonnet": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>"
  }
}
```

To make a preset your default, add this single line to your `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "ai:preset": "ai@claude-sonnet"
}
```

:::info
You can quickly set your default preset using the `setconfig` command:

```bash
wsh setconfig ai:preset=ai@claude-sonnet
```

This is easier than editing settings.json directly!
:::

## Provider-Specific Configurations

### Anthropic (Claude)

To use Claude models, create a preset like this:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-sonnet": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>"
  }
}
```

### OpenAI

To use OpenAI's models:

```json
{
  "ai@openai-gpt41": {
    "display:name": "GPT-4.1",
    "display:order": 2,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:model": "gpt-4.1",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your OpenAI API key>"
  }
}
```

### Local LLMs (Ollama)

To connect to a local Ollama instance:

```json
{
  "ai@ollama-llama": {
    "display:name": "Ollama - Llama2",
    "display:order": 3,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:baseurl": "http://localhost:11434/v1",
    "ai:name": "llama2",
    "ai:model": "llama2",
    "ai:apitoken": "ollama"
  }
}
```

Note: The `ai:apitoken` is required but can be any value as Ollama ignores it. See [Ollama OpenAI compatibility docs](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/main/docs/openai.md) for more details.

### Azure OpenAI

To connect to Azure AI services:

```json
{
  "ai@azure-gpt4": {
    "display:name": "Azure GPT-4",
    "display:order": 4,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "azure",
    "ai:baseurl": "<your Azure AI base URL>",
    "ai:model": "<your model deployment name>",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your Azure API key>"
  }
}
```

Note: Do not include query parameters or `api-version` in the `ai:baseurl`. The `ai:model` should be your model deployment name in Azure.

### Perplexity

To use Perplexity's models:

```json
{
  "ai@perplexity-sonar": {
    "display:name": "Perplexity Sonar",
    "display:order": 5,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "perplexity",
    "ai:model": "llama-3.1-sonar-small-128k-online",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your perplexity API key>"
  }
}
```

### Google (Gemini)

To use Google's Gemini models from [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com):

```json
{
  "ai@gemini-2.0": {
    "display:name": "Gemini 2.0",
    "display:order": 6,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "google",
    "ai:model": "gemini-2.0-flash-exp",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your Google AI API key>"
  }
}
```

### OpenRouter

To use OpenRouter's models:

```json
{
  "ai@openrouter": {
    "display:name": "OpenRouter (Qwen)",
    "display:order": 7,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:model": "qwen/qwen3-next-80b-a3b-thinking",
    "ai:apitoken": "<openrouter-key>",
    "ai:baseurl": "https://openrouter.ai/api/v1"
  }
}
```

## Multiple Presets Example

You can define multiple presets in your `ai.json` file:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-sonnet": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>"
  },
  "ai@openai-gpt41": {
    "display:name": "GPT-4.1",
    "display:order": 2,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:model": "gpt-4.1",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your OpenAI API key>"
  },
  "ai@ollama-llama": {
    "display:name": "Ollama - Llama2",
    "display:order": 3,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:baseurl": "http://localhost:11434/v1",
    "ai:name": "llama2",
    "ai:model": "llama2",
    "ai:apitoken": "ollama"
  },
  "ai@perplexity-sonar": {
    "display:name": "Perplexity Sonar",
    "display:order": 4,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "perplexity",
    "ai:model": "llama-3.1-sonar-small-128k-online",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your perplexity API key>"
  }
}
```

The `display:order` value determines the order in which presets appear in the dropdown menu.

Remember to set your default preset in `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "ai:preset": "ai@claude-sonnet"
}
```

## Using a Proxy

If you need to route AI requests through an HTTP proxy, you can add the `ai:proxyurl` setting to any preset:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-with-proxy": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet (via Proxy)",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>",
    "ai:proxyurl": "http://proxy.example.com:8080"
  }
}
```

The proxy URL should be in the format `http://host:port` or `https://host:port`. This setting works with all AI providers except Wave Cloud AI (the default).

Commit message:

deprecate AI presets, and update presets general docs to remove AI references

docs/docs/ai-presets.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 3.6
id: "ai-presets"
title: "AI Presets"
---
:::warning Deprecation Notice
The AI Widget and its presets are being replaced by [Wave AI](./waveai.mdx). Please refer to the Wave AI documentation for the latest AI features and configuration options.
:::


![AI Presets Menu](./img/ai-presets.png#right)

Wave's AI widget can be configured to work with various AI providers and models through presets. Presets allow you to define multiple AI configurations and easily switch between them using the dropdown menu in the AI widget.

## How AI Presets Work

AI presets are defined in `~/.config/waveterm/presets/ai.json`. You can easily edit this file using:

```bash
wsh editconfig presets/ai.json
```

Each preset defines a complete set of configuration values for the AI widget. When you select a preset from the dropdown menu, those configuration values are applied to the widget. If no preset is selected, the widget uses the default values from `settings.json`.

Here's a basic example using Claude:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-sonnet": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>"
  }
}
```

To make a preset your default, add this single line to your `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "ai:preset": "ai@claude-sonnet"
}
```

:::info
You can quickly set your default preset using the `setconfig` command:

```bash
wsh setconfig ai:preset=ai@claude-sonnet
```

This is easier than editing settings.json directly!
:::

## Provider-Specific Configurations

### Anthropic (Claude)

To use Claude models, create a preset like this:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-sonnet": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>"
  }
}
```

### OpenAI

To use OpenAI's models:

```json
{
  "ai@openai-gpt41": {
    "display:name": "GPT-4.1",
    "display:order": 2,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:model": "gpt-4.1",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your OpenAI API key>"
  }
}
```

### Local LLMs (Ollama)

To connect to a local Ollama instance:

```json
{
  "ai@ollama-llama": {
    "display:name": "Ollama - Llama2",
    "display:order": 3,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:baseurl": "http://localhost:11434/v1",
    "ai:name": "llama2",
    "ai:model": "llama2",
    "ai:apitoken": "ollama"
  }
}
```

Note: The `ai:apitoken` is required but can be any value as Ollama ignores it. See [Ollama OpenAI compatibility docs](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/main/docs/openai.md) for more details.

### Azure OpenAI

To connect to Azure AI services:

```json
{
  "ai@azure-gpt4": {
    "display:name": "Azure GPT-4",
    "display:order": 4,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "azure",
    "ai:baseurl": "<your Azure AI base URL>",
    "ai:model": "<your model deployment name>",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your Azure API key>"
  }
}
```

Note: Do not include query parameters or `api-version` in the `ai:baseurl`. The `ai:model` should be your model deployment name in Azure.

### Perplexity

To use Perplexity's models:

```json
{
  "ai@perplexity-sonar": {
    "display:name": "Perplexity Sonar",
    "display:order": 5,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "perplexity",
    "ai:model": "llama-3.1-sonar-small-128k-online",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your perplexity API key>"
  }
}
```

### Google (Gemini)

To use Google's Gemini models from [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com):

```json
{
  "ai@gemini-2.0": {
    "display:name": "Gemini 2.0",
    "display:order": 6,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "google",
    "ai:model": "gemini-2.0-flash-exp",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your Google AI API key>"
  }
}
```

### OpenRouter

To use OpenRouter's models:

```json
{
  "ai@openrouter": {
    "display:name": "OpenRouter (Qwen)",
    "display:order": 7,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:model": "qwen/qwen3-next-80b-a3b-thinking",
    "ai:apitoken": "<openrouter-key>",
    "ai:baseurl": "https://openrouter.ai/api/v1"
  }
}
```

## Multiple Presets Example

You can define multiple presets in your `ai.json` file:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-sonnet": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>"
  },
  "ai@openai-gpt41": {
    "display:name": "GPT-4.1",
    "display:order": 2,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:model": "gpt-4.1",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your OpenAI API key>"
  },
  "ai@ollama-llama": {
    "display:name": "Ollama - Llama2",
    "display:order": 3,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:baseurl": "http://localhost:11434/v1",
    "ai:name": "llama2",
    "ai:model": "llama2",
    "ai:apitoken": "ollama"
  },
  "ai@perplexity-sonar": {
    "display:name": "Perplexity Sonar",
    "display:order": 4,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "perplexity",
    "ai:model": "llama-3.1-sonar-small-128k-online",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your perplexity API key>"
  }
}
```

The `display:order` value determines the order in which presets appear in the dropdown menu.

Remember to set your default preset in `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "ai:preset": "ai@claude-sonnet"
}
```

## Using a Proxy

If you need to route AI requests through an HTTP proxy, you can add the `ai:proxyurl` setting to any preset:

```json
{
  "ai@claude-with-proxy": {
    "display:name": "Claude 3 Sonnet (via Proxy)",
    "display:order": 1,
    "ai:*": true,
    "ai:apitype": "anthropic",
    "ai:model": "claude-3-5-sonnet-latest",
    "ai:apitoken": "<your anthropic API key>",
    "ai:proxyurl": "http://proxy.example.com:8080"
  }
}
```

The proxy URL should be in the format `http://host:port` or `https://host:port`. This setting works with all AI providers except Wave Cloud AI (the default).
