docs/docs/wsh.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 4
id: "wsh"
title: "wsh overview"
---

The `wsh` command provides Wave Terminal's core command line interface, allowing users to interact with both terminal and graphical elements from the command line. This guide covers the basics of using `wsh` and its key features.

See the [wsh reference](/wsh-reference) for a list of all wsh commands and their arguments.

## Overview

At its core, `wsh` enables seamless interaction between your terminal commands and Wave's graphical blocks. It allows you to:

- Control graphical widgets directly from the command line
- Share data between terminal sessions and GUI components
- Manage your workspace programmatically
- Connect remote and local environments
- Send CLI output and files directly to AI conversations
- Run terminal commands in separate, isolated blocks

## Key Concepts

### Interacting with Blocks

`wsh` provides direct interaction with Wave's graphical blocks through the command line. For example:

```bash
# Open a file in the editor
wsh edit config.json

# Get the current file path from a preview block
wsh getmeta -b 2 file

# Send output to an AI assistant (the "-" reads from stdin)
ls -la | wsh ai - "what are the largest files here?"
```

### Persistent State

`wsh` can maintain state across terminal sessions through its variable and file storage system:

```bash
# Store a variable that persists across sessions
wsh setvar API_KEY=abc123

# Store globally
wsh setvar DEPLOY_ENV=prod
# Or store in the current workspace
wsh setvar -b workspace DEPLOY_ENV=staging

# Use stored variables in commands
curl -H "Authorization: $(wsh getvar API_KEY)" https://api.example.com

# Store a file that can be accessed from any block
echo "data" | wsh file write wavefile://global/config.txt

# Append logs from multiple terminals
echo "Terminal 1 log" | wsh file append wavefile://workspace/logs.txt
```

### Block Management

Every visual element in Wave is a block, and `wsh` gives you complete control over them (hold Ctrl+Shift to see block numbers):

```bash
# Create a new block showing a webpage
wsh web open github.com

# Do a web search in a new block
wsh web open "wave terminal"

# Run a command in a new block and auto-close when done
wsh run -x -- npm test

# Get information about the current block
wsh getmeta
```

## Common Workflows

Here are some common ways to use `wsh`:

### Development Workflow

```bash
# Open directory or markdown files
wsh view .
wsh view README.md

# add a -m to open the block in "magnified" mode
wsh view -m README.md

# Start development server in a new block (-m will magnify the block on startup)
wsh run -m -- npm run dev

# Open documentation in a web block
wsh web open http://localhost:3000
```

### Remote Development

```bash
# Connect to remote server with optional key
wsh ssh -i ~/.ssh/mykey.pem dev@server

# Edit remote files
wsh edit /etc/nginx/nginx.conf

# Monitor remote logs
wsh run -- tail -f /var/log/app.log

# Share variables between sessions
wsh setvar -b tab SHARED_ENV=staging
```

### AI-Assisted Development

The `wsh ai` command appends content to the Wave AI sidebar. By default, files are attached without auto-submitting, allowing you to review and add more context before sending.

```bash
# Pipe output to AI sidebar (ask question in UI)
git diff | wsh ai -

# Attach files with a message
wsh ai main.go utils.go -m "find bugs in these files"

# Auto-submit with message
wsh ai config.json -s -m "explain this config"

# Start new chat with attached files
wsh ai -n *.log -m "analyze these logs"

# Attach multiple file types (images, PDFs, code)
wsh ai screenshot.png report.pdf app.py -m "review these"

# Debug with stdin and auto-submit
dmesg | wsh ai -s - -m "help me understand these errors"
```

**Flags:**
- `-` - Read from stdin instead of a file
- `-m, --message` - Add message text along with files
- `-s, --submit` - Auto-submit immediately (default is to wait for user)
- `-n, --new` - Clear chat and start fresh conversation

**File Limits:**
- Text files: 200KB max
- PDFs: 5MB max
- Images: 7MB max
- Maximum 15 files per command

## Tips & Features

1. **Working with Blocks**

   - Use block numbers (1-9) to target specific blocks within a tab (hold Ctrl+Shift to see block numbers)
   - Can get full block ids by right click a block's header and selecting "Copy Block Id" (useful for scripting)
   - Use references like "this", "tab", "workspace", or "global" for different scopes

2. **Data Storage**

   - Use `wsh setvar/getvar` for configuration and secrets
   - Store file data using `wsh file`, which can be easily referenced in all terminals (local and remote)
   - Use appropriate storage scopes (block, tab, workspace, global)

3. **Command Execution**
   - Use `wsh run` to execute commands in new blocks
   - Send command output and files quickly to AI blocks with `wsh ai`

## Scripting with wsh

wsh commands can be combined in scripts to automate common tasks. Here's an example that sets up a development environment and uses `wsh notify` to monitor a long-running build:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Setup development environment
wsh run -- docker-compose up -d
wsh web open localhost:8080
wsh view ./src
wsh run -- npm run test:watch

# Get notified when long-running tasks complete using wsh notify
npm run build && wsh notify "Build complete" || wsh notify "Build failed"
```

## Getting Help

You can get help on available commands by running `wsh` with no arguments, or get detailed help for a specific command using `wsh [command] -h`.

For a complete reference of all `wsh` functionality, see the [WSH Command Reference](./wsh-reference).

Commit message:

update docs, remove some wavefile dependencies

docs/docs/wsh.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 4
id: "wsh"
title: "wsh overview"
---

The `wsh` command provides Wave Terminal's core command line interface, allowing users to interact with both terminal and graphical elements from the command line. This guide covers the basics of using `wsh` and its key features.

See the [wsh reference](/wsh-reference) for a list of all wsh commands and their arguments.

## Overview

At its core, `wsh` enables seamless interaction between your terminal commands and Wave's graphical blocks. It allows you to:

- Control graphical widgets directly from the command line
- Share data between terminal sessions and GUI components
- Manage your workspace programmatically
- Connect remote and local environments
- Send CLI output and files directly to AI conversations
- Run terminal commands in separate, isolated blocks

## Key Concepts

### Interacting with Blocks

`wsh` provides direct interaction with Wave's graphical blocks through the command line. For example:

```bash
# Open a file in the editor
wsh edit config.json

# Get the current file path from a preview block
wsh getmeta -b 2 file

# Send output to an AI assistant (the "-" reads from stdin)
ls -la | wsh ai - "what are the largest files here?"
```

### Persistent State

`wsh` can maintain state across terminal sessions through its variable system:

```bash
# Store a variable that persists across sessions
wsh setvar API_KEY=abc123

# Store globally
wsh setvar DEPLOY_ENV=prod
# Or store in the current workspace
wsh setvar -b workspace DEPLOY_ENV=staging

# Use stored variables in commands
curl -H "Authorization: $(wsh getvar API_KEY)" https://api.example.com
```

### Accessing Local Files from Remote

When working on remote machines, you can access files on your local computer using the `wsh://local/~/` path prefix with `wsh file` commands. The shorthand `/~/` can also be used as an alias for `wsh://local/~/`:

```bash
# Read a local file from a remote machine
wsh file cat wsh://local/~/config/app.json

# Run a local script on the remote machine using shell process substitution
bash <(wsh file cat wsh://local/~/scripts/deploy.sh)
python <(wsh file cat wsh://local/~/scripts/deploy.py)

# Append remote output to a local log file
echo "Remote machine log entry" | wsh file append wsh://local/~/app.log

# Copy a local file to the remote machine
wsh file cp wsh://local/~/data.csv ./remote-data.csv

# Copy remote file back to local machine
wsh file cp ./results.txt wsh://local/~/results.txt

# You can also use the shorthand /~/ instead of wsh://local/~/
wsh file cat /~/config/app.json
```

### Block Management

Every visual element in Wave is a block, and `wsh` gives you complete control over them (hold Ctrl+Shift to see block numbers):

```bash
# Create a new block showing a webpage
wsh web open github.com

# Do a web search in a new block
wsh web open "wave terminal"

# Run a command in a new block and auto-close when done
wsh run -x -- npm test

# Get information about the current block
wsh getmeta
```

## Common Workflows

Here are some common ways to use `wsh`:

### Development Workflow

```bash
# Open directory or markdown files
wsh view .
wsh view README.md

# add a -m to open the block in "magnified" mode
wsh view -m README.md

# Start development server in a new block (-m will magnify the block on startup)
wsh run -m -- npm run dev

# Open documentation in a web block
wsh web open http://localhost:3000
```

### Remote Development

```bash
# Connect to remote server with optional key
wsh ssh -i ~/.ssh/mykey.pem dev@server

# Edit remote files
wsh edit /etc/nginx/nginx.conf

# Monitor remote logs
wsh run -- tail -f /var/log/app.log

# Share variables between sessions
wsh setvar -b tab SHARED_ENV=staging
```

### AI-Assisted Development

The `wsh ai` command appends content to the Wave AI sidebar. By default, files are attached without auto-submitting, allowing you to review and add more context before sending.

```bash
# Pipe output to AI sidebar (ask question in UI)
git diff | wsh ai -

# Attach files with a message
wsh ai main.go utils.go -m "find bugs in these files"

# Auto-submit with message
wsh ai config.json -s -m "explain this config"

# Start new chat with attached files
wsh ai -n *.log -m "analyze these logs"

# Attach multiple file types (images, PDFs, code)
wsh ai screenshot.png report.pdf app.py -m "review these"

# Debug with stdin and auto-submit
dmesg | wsh ai -s - -m "help me understand these errors"
```

**Flags:**
- `-` - Read from stdin instead of a file
- `-m, --message` - Add message text along with files
- `-s, --submit` - Auto-submit immediately (default is to wait for user)
- `-n, --new` - Clear chat and start fresh conversation

**File Limits:**
- Text files: 200KB max
- PDFs: 5MB max
- Images: 7MB max
- Maximum 15 files per command

## Tips & Features

1. **Working with Blocks**

   - Use block numbers (1-9) to target specific blocks within a tab (hold Ctrl+Shift to see block numbers)
   - Can get full block ids by right click a block's header and selecting "Copy Block Id" (useful for scripting)
   - Use references like "this", "tab", "workspace", or "global" for different scopes

2. **Data Storage**

   - Use `wsh setvar/getvar` for configuration and secrets
   - Store file data using `wsh file`, which can be easily referenced in all terminals (local and remote)
   - Use appropriate storage scopes (block, tab, workspace, global)

3. **Command Execution**
   - Use `wsh run` to execute commands in new blocks
   - Send command output and files quickly to AI blocks with `wsh ai`

## Scripting with wsh

wsh commands can be combined in scripts to automate common tasks. Here's an example that sets up a development environment and uses `wsh notify` to monitor a long-running build:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Setup development environment
wsh run -- docker-compose up -d
wsh web open localhost:8080
wsh view ./src
wsh run -- npm run test:watch

# Get notified when long-running tasks complete using wsh notify
npm run build && wsh notify "Build complete" || wsh notify "Build failed"
```

## Getting Help

You can get help on available commands by running `wsh` with no arguments, or get detailed help for a specific command using `wsh [command] -h`.

For a complete reference of all `wsh` functionality, see the [WSH Command Reference](./wsh-reference).
