README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://www.waveterm.dev">
	<picture>
		<source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="./assets/wave-dark.png">
		<source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="./assets/wave-light.png">
		<img alt="Wave Terminal Logo" src="./assets/wave-light.png" width="240">
	</picture>
  </a>
  <br/>
</p>

# Wave Terminal

[![FOSSA Status](https://app.fossa.com/api/projects/git%2Bgithub.com%2Fwavetermdev%2Fwaveterm.svg?type=shield)](https://app.fossa.com/projects/git%2Bgithub.com%2Fwavetermdev%2Fwaveterm?ref=badge_shield)

Wave is an open-source terminal that combines traditional terminal features with graphical capabilities like file previews, web browsing, and AI assistance. It runs on MacOS, Linux, and Windows.

Modern development involves constantly switching between terminals and browsers - checking documentation, previewing files, monitoring systems, and using AI tools. Wave brings these graphical tools directly into the terminal, letting you control them from the command line. This means you can stay in your terminal workflow while still having access to the visual interfaces you need.

![WaveTerm Screenshot](./assets/wave-screenshot.webp)

## Key Features

- Flexible drag & drop interface to organize terminal blocks, editors, web browsers, and AI assistants
- Built-in editor for seamlessly editing remote files with syntax highlighting and modern editor features
- Rich file preview system for remote files (markdown, images, video, PDFs, CSVs, directories)
- Quick full-screen toggle for any block - expand terminals, editors, and previews for better visibility, then instantly return to multi-block view
- Wave AI - Context-aware terminal assistant that reads your terminal output, analyzes widgets, and performs file operations
- AI chat widget with support for multiple models (OpenAI, Claude, Azure, Perplexity, Ollama)
- Command Blocks for isolating and monitoring individual commands with auto-close options
- One-click remote connections with full terminal and file system access
- Secure secret storage using native system backends - store API keys and credentials locally, access them across SSH sessions
- Rich customization including tab themes, terminal styles, and background images
- Powerful `wsh` command system for managing your workspace from the CLI and sharing data between terminal sessions
- Connected file management with `wsh file` - seamlessly copy and sync files between local, remote SSH hosts, Wave filesystem, and S3

## Wave AI

Wave AI is your context-aware terminal assistant with access to your workspace:

- **Terminal Context**: Reads terminal output and scrollback for debugging and analysis
- **File Operations**: Read, write, and edit files with automatic backups and user approval
- **CLI Integration**: Use `wsh ai` to pipe output or attach files directly from the command line
- **Free Beta**: Included AI credits while we refine the experience
- **Coming Soon**: Command execution (with approval), local model support, and alternate AI providers (BYOK)

Learn more in our [Wave AI documentation](https://docs.waveterm.dev/waveai).

## Installation

Wave Terminal works on macOS, Linux, and Windows.

Platform-specific installation instructions can be found [here](https://docs.waveterm.dev/gettingstarted).

You can also install Wave Terminal directly from: [www.waveterm.dev/download](https://www.waveterm.dev/download).

### Minimum requirements

Wave Terminal runs on the following platforms:

- macOS 11 or later (arm64, x64)
- Windows 10 1809 or later (x64)
- Linux based on glibc-2.28 or later (Debian 10, RHEL 8, Ubuntu 20.04, etc.) (arm64, x64)

The WSH helper runs on the following platforms:

- macOS 11 or later (arm64, x64)
- Windows 10 or later (arm64, x64)
- Linux Kernel 2.6.32 or later (x64), Linux Kernel 3.1 or later (arm64)

## Roadmap

Wave is constantly improving! Our roadmap will be continuously updated with our goals for each release. You can find it [here](./ROADMAP.md).

Want to provide input to our future releases? Connect with us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/XfvZ334gwU) or open a [Feature Request](https://github.com/wavetermdev/waveterm/issues/new/choose)!

## Links

- Homepage &mdash; https://www.waveterm.dev
- Download Page &mdash; https://www.waveterm.dev/download
- Documentation &mdash; https://docs.waveterm.dev
- Legacy Documentation &mdash; https://legacydocs.waveterm.dev
- Blog &mdash; https://blog.waveterm.dev
- X &mdash; https://x.com/wavetermdev
- Discord Community &mdash; https://discord.gg/XfvZ334gwU

## Building from Source

See [Building Wave Terminal](BUILD.md).

## Contributing

Wave uses GitHub Issues for issue tracking.

Find more information in our [Contributions Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md), which includes:

- [Ways to contribute](CONTRIBUTING.md#contributing-to-wave-terminal)
- [Contribution guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md#before-you-start)

## License

Wave Terminal is licensed under the Apache-2.0 License. For more information on our dependencies, see [here](./ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.md).

Commit message:

readme updates for durable sessions / wave ai (#2886)
readme hasn't been updated in a while and was out of date. update the
hero text, wave ai section, and add durable sessions.

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://www.waveterm.dev">
	<picture>
		<source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="./assets/wave-dark.png">
		<source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="./assets/wave-light.png">
		<img alt="Wave Terminal Logo" src="./assets/wave-light.png" width="240">
	</picture>
  </a>
  <br/>
</p>

# Wave Terminal

[![FOSSA Status](https://app.fossa.com/api/projects/git%2Bgithub.com%2Fwavetermdev%2Fwaveterm.svg?type=shield)](https://app.fossa.com/projects/git%2Bgithub.com%2Fwavetermdev%2Fwaveterm?ref=badge_shield)

Wave is an open-source, AI-integrated terminal for macOS, Linux, and Windows. It works with any AI model. Bring your own API keys for OpenAI, Claude, or Gemini, or run local models via Ollama and LM Studio. No accounts required.

Wave also supports durable SSH sessions that survive network interruptions and restarts, with automatic reconnection. Edit remote files with a built-in graphical editor and preview files inline without leaving the terminal.

![WaveTerm Screenshot](./assets/wave-screenshot.webp)

## Key Features

- Wave AI - Context-aware terminal assistant that reads your terminal output, analyzes widgets, and performs file operations
- Durable SSH Sessions - Remote terminal sessions survive connection interruptions, network changes, and Wave restarts with automatic reconnection
- Flexible drag & drop interface to organize terminal blocks, editors, web browsers, and AI assistants
- Built-in editor for editing remote files with syntax highlighting and modern editor features
- Rich file preview system for remote files (markdown, images, video, PDFs, CSVs, directories)
- Quick full-screen toggle for any block - expand terminals, editors, and previews for better visibility, then instantly return to multi-block view
- AI chat widget with support for multiple models (OpenAI, Claude, Azure, Perplexity, Ollama)
- Command Blocks for isolating and monitoring individual commands
- One-click remote connections with full terminal and file system access
- Secure secret storage using native system backends - store API keys and credentials locally, access them across SSH sessions
- Rich customization including tab themes, terminal styles, and background images
- Powerful `wsh` command system for managing your workspace from the CLI and sharing data between terminal sessions
- Connected file management with `wsh file` - seamlessly copy and sync files between local and remote SSH hosts

## Wave AI

Wave AI is your context-aware terminal assistant with access to your workspace:

- **Terminal Context**: Reads terminal output and scrollback for debugging and analysis
- **File Operations**: Read, write, and edit files with automatic backups and user approval
- **CLI Integration**: Use `wsh ai` to pipe output or attach files directly from the command line
- **BYOK Support**: Bring your own API keys for OpenAI, Claude, Gemini, Azure, and other providers
- **Local Models**: Run local models with Ollama, LM Studio, and other OpenAI-compatible providers
- **Free Beta**: Included AI credits while we refine the experience
- **Coming Soon**: Command execution (with approval)

Learn more in our [Wave AI documentation](https://docs.waveterm.dev/waveai) and [Wave AI Modes documentation](https://docs.waveterm.dev/waveai-modes).

## Installation

Wave Terminal works on macOS, Linux, and Windows.

Platform-specific installation instructions can be found [here](https://docs.waveterm.dev/gettingstarted).

You can also install Wave Terminal directly from: [www.waveterm.dev/download](https://www.waveterm.dev/download).

### Minimum requirements

Wave Terminal runs on the following platforms:

- macOS 11 or later (arm64, x64)
- Windows 10 1809 or later (x64)
- Linux based on glibc-2.28 or later (Debian 10, RHEL 8, Ubuntu 20.04, etc.) (arm64, x64)

The WSH helper runs on the following platforms:

- macOS 11 or later (arm64, x64)
- Windows 10 or later (x64)
- Linux Kernel 2.6.32 or later (x64), Linux Kernel 3.1 or later (arm64)

## Roadmap

Wave is constantly improving! Our roadmap will be continuously updated with our goals for each release. You can find it [here](./ROADMAP.md).

Want to provide input to our future releases? Connect with us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/XfvZ334gwU) or open a [Feature Request](https://github.com/wavetermdev/waveterm/issues/new/choose)!

## Links

- Homepage &mdash; https://www.waveterm.dev
- Download Page &mdash; https://www.waveterm.dev/download
- Documentation &mdash; https://docs.waveterm.dev
- X &mdash; https://x.com/wavetermdev
- Discord Community &mdash; https://discord.gg/XfvZ334gwU

## Building from Source

See [Building Wave Terminal](BUILD.md).

## Contributing

Wave uses GitHub Issues for issue tracking.

Find more information in our [Contributions Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md), which includes:

- [Ways to contribute](CONTRIBUTING.md#contributing-to-wave-terminal)
- [Contribution guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md#before-you-start)

## License

Wave Terminal is licensed under the Apache-2.0 License. For more information on our dependencies, see [here](./ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.md).
